---
composer_id: c2de87e8-94c0-488f-92c5-de6abf150d03
name: Terry Riley
normalized_name: Riley, Terry
birth_year: 1935
era: Contemporary
nationality: American
scraped_date: 2025-12-25
sources:
  wikipedia: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Terry_Riley
file_version: 1
---

---

# Terry Riley (b. 1935)

---

**Era:** Contemporary
**Nationality:** American

---

## Biography

Terrence Mitchell Riley
(born June 24, 1935) is an American composer and performing musician
[
1
]
best known as a pioneer of the
minimalist
school of composition.
[
2
]
Influenced by
jazz
and
Indian classical music
, his work became notable for its innovative use of
repetition
,
tape music
techniques,
improvisation
, and
delay systems
.
[
2
]
His best known works are the 1964 composition
In C
and the 1969 album
A Rainbow in Curved Air
, both considered landmarks of minimalism and important influences on
experimental music
,
rock
, and contemporary
electronic music
.
[
2
]
Subsequent works such as
Shri Camel
(1980) explored
just intonation
.
[
2
]

Raised in Redding, California, Riley began studying
composition
and performing solo piano in the 1950s. He befriended and collaborated with composer
La Monte Young
, and later became involved with both the
San Francisco Tape Music Center
and Young's New York collective, the
Theatre of Eternal Music
. A three-record deal with
CBS
in the late 1960s brought his work to wider audiences. In 1970, he began intensive studies under
Hindustani
singer
Pandit Pran Nath
, whom he often accompanied in performance. He has collaborated frequently throughout his career, most extensively with
chamber ensemble
the
Kronos Quartet
and his son, guitarist
Gyan Riley
.
[
2
]

Riley was born in
Colfax, California
on June 24, 1935,
[
2
]
and grew up in
Redding, California
.
[
3
]
In the 1950s, he began performing as a solo pianist and studied composition at
San Francisco State University
, the
San Francisco Conservatory
, and the
University of California, Berkeley
, studying with
Seymour Shifrin
and
Robert Erickson
. He befriended composer
La Monte Young
, whose earliest
minimalist
compositions using sustained tones were an influence; together, Young and Riley performed Riley's improvisatory composition
Concert for Two Pianists and Tape Recorders
in 1959–60.
[
4
]
Riley later became involved in the experimental
San Francisco Tape Music Center
, working with
Morton Subotnick
,
Steve Reich
,
Pauline Oliveros
, and
Ramon Sender
. Throughout the 1960s, he also traveled frequently in Europe, taking in musical influences and supporting himself by playing in
piano bars
. He also performed briefly with the
Theatre of Eternal Music
in New York in 1965-1966.
[
citation needed
]

His most influential teacher was
Pandit Pran Nath
(1918–1996), a master of Indian classical voice who also taught La Monte Young,
Marian Zazeela
, and
Michael Harrison
. Riley made numerous trips to India over the course of their association to study and accompany him on
tabla
,
tambura
, and voice. In 1971 he joined the
Mills College
faculty to teach Indian classical music. Riley also cites
John Cage
and "the really great
chamber music
groups of
John Coltrane
and
Miles Davis
,
Charles Mingus
,
Bill Evans
, and
Gil Evans
" as influences on his work.
[
5
]
He was awarded an Honorary Doctorate Degree in Music at
Chapman University
in 2007.
[
6
]

Around 1980, Riley began his long-lasting association with the
Kronos Quartet
when he met their founder
David Harrington
while at Mills. Throughout his career, Riley composed 13
string quartets
for the ensemble, in addition to other works. He wrote his first orchestral piece,
Jade Palace
, in 1991, and has continued to pursue that avenue, with several commissioned orchestral compositions following. He is also currently performing and teaching both as an Indian
raga
vocalist and as a solo pianist.
[
citation needed
]

Riley continues to perform live, and was part of the
All Tomorrow's Parties
festival in May 2011.
[
7
]

"Where American
minimalism
, Indian classical
raga
,
barrelhouse piano
,
modal jazz
, and rugged western
individualism
all intersect, there stands the sage composer Terry Riley. [...] His work exploded listeners’ notions of classical
composition
with his ever-shifting
structures
and epic
improvisations
." Riley was initially inspired by jazz saxophonist
John Coltrane
.
[
8
]

Riley's music is usually based on improvising through a series of
modal
figures of
different lengths
. Works such as
In C
(1964) and the
Keyboard Studies
(1964–1966) demonstrate this technique. The first performance of
In C
was given by
Steve Reich
,
Jon Gibson
,
Pauline Oliveros
, and
Morton Subotnick
, among others. Its form was an innovation: The piece consists of 53 separate modules of roughly one measure apiece, each containing a different musical pattern but each, as the title implies, in the key of C.
[
9
]
One performer beats a steady pulse of
C
s on the piano to keep tempo. The others, in any number and on any instrument, perform these musical modules following a few loose guidelines, with the different musical modules interlocking in various ways as time goes on.

In the 1950s Riley was already working with
tape loops
, a technology still in its infancy at the time; he would later, with the help of a sound engineer, create what he called a "time-lag accumulator".
[
10
]
He has continued manipulating tapes to musical effect, in the studio and in live performances throughout his career. An early tape loop piece titled
Music for the Gift
(1963) featured the trumpet playing of
Chet Baker
. It was during Riley's time in Paris, while composing this piece, that he conceived of and created the time-lag accumulator technique.
[
10
]
Premiered in 1968 in the Magic Theatre Exhibition at the Nelson Atkins Gallery in
Kansas City
,
[
11
]
a new version of the installation was commissioned three decades later by
Lille 2004
-
European Capital of Culture
and purchased by the
Museum of Contemporary Art of Lyon
. A third version was built and presented by the Schauspielhaus in
Bochum
in 2019.  He has composed using
just intonation
as well as
microtones
.
[
12
]
In New York City in the mid-1960s he played with his longtime friend La Monte Young, as well as with
John Cale
and tabla player
Angus MacLise
, who were founding members of
The Velvet Underground
. Riley is credited as inspiring Cale's keyboard part on
Lou Reed
's composition "
All Tomorrow's Parties
", which was sung by German actress
Nico
and included on the album
The Velvet Underground and Nico
, recorded in 1966.
[
citation needed
]

Riley's famous overdubbed electronic album
A Rainbow in Curved Air
(recorded 1968, released 1969) inspired many later developments in electronic music. These include
Pete Townshend
's
organ
parts on
The Who
's "
Won't Get Fooled Again
" and "
Baba O'Riley
", the latter named in tribute to Riley as well as to
Meher Baba
.
[
13
]
Charles Hazlewood
, in his BBC documentary on Minimalism (Part 1) suggests that the album '
Tubular Bells
' by
Mike Oldfield
was also inspired by Riley's example.
[
14
]
The English progressive rock group Curved Air, formed in 1970, took its name from the album.
[
15
]

Riley's collaborators have included the
Rova Saxophone Quartet
,
Pauline Oliveros
, the
ARTE Quartett
, and, as mentioned, the Kronos Quartet. His 1995
Lisbon Concert
recording features him in a solo piano format, improvising on his own works. In the liner notes Riley cites
Art Tatum
,
Bud Powell
and
Bill Evans
as his piano "heroes", illustrating the importance of jazz to his conceptions.
[
citation needed
]
[
16
]

He has three children: one daughter, Colleen,
[
17
]
and two sons,
Gyan
, who is a guitarist, and Shahn.
[
18
]
He was married to Ann Riley until her death in 2015.
[
19
]
Since 2020, Riley has lived in Japan.
[
20
]

---

## Sources

✓ **Wikipedia**: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Terry_Riley

*Scraped on 2025-12-25 01:09 UTC*