---
composer_id: 8da66c3d-362c-4c22-acfb-862ef5f832c0
name: Charles Ives
normalized_name: Ives, Charles
birth_year: 1874
death_year: 1954
era: 20th_Century
nationality: American
scraped_date: 2025-12-25
sources:
  wikipedia: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charles_Ives
file_version: 1
---

---

# Charles Ives (1874-1954)

---

**Era:** 20th_Century
**Nationality:** American

---

## Biography

Charles Edward Ives
(
/
aɪ
v
z
/
; October 20, 1874 – May 19, 1954) was an American
modernist
composer, actuary and businessman.
[
1
]
Ives was among the earliest renowned American composers to achieve recognition on a global scale.
[
2
]
His music was largely ignored during his early career, and many of his works went unperformed for many years. Later in life, the quality of his music was publicly recognized through the efforts of contemporaries like
Henry Cowell
and
Lou Harrison
, and he came to be regarded as an "American original".
[
3
]
[
4
]
[
5
]
He was also among the first composers to engage in a systematic program of
experimental music
, with
musical techniques
including
polytonality
,
polyrhythm
,
tone clusters
,
aleatory
elements, and
quarter tones
.
[
6
]
His experimentation foreshadowed many musical innovations that were later more widely adopted during the 20th century. Hence, he is often regarded as the leading American composer of art music of the 20th century.
[
7
]

Sources of Ives's tonal imagery included
hymn tunes
and
traditional songs
; he also incorporated melodies of the town band at holiday parade, the fiddlers at Saturday night dances, patriotic songs, sentimental parlor ballads, and the melodies of
Stephen Foster
.

Ives was born in
Danbury, Connecticut
, on October 20, 1874,
[
8
]
the son of George (Edward) Ives, a
US Army
bandleader in the
American Civil War
, and his wife, Mary Elizabeth Ives. The Iveses, descended from founding colonists of Connecticut, were one of Danbury's leading families, and they were prominent in business and civic improvement. They were similarly active in progressive social movements of the 19th century, including the abolition of slavery.
[
7
]
[
9
]

George Ives directed bands, choirs, and orchestras, and taught
music theory
and a number of instruments.
[
10
]
Charles got his influences by sitting in the Danbury town square and listening to his father's marching band and other bands on other sides of the square
simultaneously
. His father taught him and his brother (Joseph) Moss Ives (February 5, 1876 – April 7, 1939
[
11
]
) music,
[
10
]
teaching
harmony
and
counterpoint
and guided his first compositions; George took an open-minded approach to theory, encouraging him to experiment in
bitonal
and
polytonal
harmonizations.
[
7
]
It was from him that Ives also learned the music of
Stephen Foster
.
[
12
]
He became a church
organist
at the age of 14
[
13
]
and wrote various hymns and songs for church services, including his
Variations on "America"
, which he wrote for a
Fourth of July
concert in
Brewster, New York
. It is considered challenging even by modern concert organists, but he famously spoke of it as being "as much fun as playing
baseball
", a commentary on his own organ technique at that age.
[
14
]

Ives moved to
New Haven, Connecticut
, in 1893, enrolling in the
Hopkins School
, where he captained the baseball team. In September 1894, Ives entered
Yale University
, studying under
Horatio Parker
. Here he composed in a choral style similar to his mentor, writing church music and even an 1896 campaign song for
William McKinley
.
[
15
]
On November 4, 1894, his father died, a crushing blow to him, but to a large degree, he continued the musical experimentation he had begun with him. His brother Moss later became a lawyer.

At Yale, Ives was a prominent figure; he was a member of HeBoule,
Delta Kappa Epsilon
(Phi chapter) and
Wolf's Head Society
, and sat as chairman of the
Ivy Committee
.
[
15
]
He enjoyed sports at Yale and played on the varsity
American football
team. Michael C. Murphy, his coach, once remarked that it was a "crying shame" that he spent so much time at music as otherwise he could have been a champion sprinter.
[
16
]
His works
Calcium Light Night
and
Yale-Princeton Football Game
show the influence of college and sports on Ives's composition. He wrote his
Symphony No. 1
as his senior thesis under Parker's supervision.
[
15
]
Ives continued his work as a church organist until May 1902.

Soon after he graduated from Yale in 1898,
[
17
]
he started work in the
actuarial
department of the
Mutual Life Insurance Company of New York
.
[
18
]
In 1899, Ives moved to employment with the insurance agency Charles H. Raymond & Co., where he stayed until 1906. In 1907, upon the failure of Raymond & Co., he and his friend
Julian Myrick
formed their own
insurance agency
Ives & Co., which later became Ives & Myrick, where he remained until he retired.
[
19
]

During his career as an insurance executive and actuary, Ives devised creative ways to structure life-insurance packages for people of means, which laid the foundation of the modern practice of
estate planning
.
[
20
]
His
Life Insurance with Relation to Inheritance Tax
, published in 1918, was well received. As a result of this he achieved considerable fame in the insurance industry of his time, with many of his business peers surprised to learn that he was also a composer. In his spare time, he composed music and, until his marriage, worked as an organist in Danbury and New Haven as well as
Bloomfield, New Jersey
, and New York City.
[
15
]

In 1907, Ives suffered the first of several "heart attacks" (as he and his family called them) that he had throughout his life. These attacks may have been psychological in origin rather than physical. Stuart Feder questions the legitimacy of these heart attacks, as he could not find any medical confirmation of them in previous reports. According to Feder, "For the only reliable information tells us that he suffered from palpitations, not pain, the cardinal symptom of heart attack."
[
21
]
Following his recovery from the 1907 attack, Ives entered into one of the most creative periods of his life as a composer.

In 1908, he married Harmony Twichell, daughter of Congregational minister
Joseph Twichell
and his wife, Julia Harmony Cushman.
[
19
]
The young couple moved into their own apartment in New York.

Ives had a successful career in insurance. He also continued to be a prolific composer until he suffered another of several heart attacks in 1918, after which he composed very little. He wrote his last piece, the song "Sunrise", in August 1926.
[
19
]
In 1922, Ives published his
114 Songs
, which represents the breadth of his work as a composer—it includes
art songs
, songs he wrote as a teenager and young man, and highly
dissonant
songs such as "The Majority".
[
19
]

According to his wife, one day in early 1927, Ives came downstairs with tears in his eyes. He could compose no more, he said; "nothing sounds right".
[
22
]
There have been numerous theories advanced to explain the silence of his late years. It seems as mysterious as the last several decades of the life of
Jean Sibelius
, who stopped composing at almost the same time. While Ives had stopped composing, and was increasingly plagued by health problems, he continued to revise and refine his earlier work, as well as oversee premieres of his music.
[
19
]

After continuing health problems, including
diabetes
, in 1930 he retired from his insurance business. Although he had more time to devote to music, he was unable to write any new music. During the 1940s, he revised his
Concord Sonata
, publishing it in 1947 (an earlier version of the sonata and the accompanying prose volume,
Essays Before a Sonata
[
23
]
were privately printed in 1920).
[
24
]

Ives died of a stroke in 1954 in New York City. His widow, who died in 1969 at age 92, bequeathed the royalties from his music to the
American Academy of Arts and Letters
for the
Charles Ives Prize
.
[
25
]

Ives's career and dedication to music began when he started playing drums in his father's band at a young age. Ives published a large collection of songs, many of which had piano parts. He composed two
string quartets
and other works of
chamber music
, though he is now best known for his
orchestral music
. His work as an organist led him to write
Variations on "America"
in 1891, which he premiered at a recital celebrating the Fourth of July.

He composed four numbered symphonies as well as a number of works with the word 'Symphony' in their titles, as well as
The Unanswered Question
(1908), written for the unusual combination of trumpet, four flutes, and string quartet.
The Unanswered Question
was influenced by the New England writers
Ralph Waldo Emerson
and
Henry David Thoreau
.

Around 1910, Ives began composing his most accomplished works, including the
Holiday Symphony
and
Three Places in New England
.
The Piano Sonata No. 2, Concord, Mass
(known as the
Concord Sonata
), was one of his most notable pieces. He started work on this in 1911 and completed most of it in 1915. However, it was not until 1920 that the piece was published. His revised version was not released until 1947. This piece contains one of the most striking examples of his experimentation. In the second
movement
, he instructed the pianist to use a
14
+
3
⁄
4
in (37 cm) piece of wood to create a massive cluster chord. The piece also amply demonstrates Ives's fondness for
musical quotation
: the opening bars of
Beethoven
's
Fifth Symphony
are quoted in each movement. Sinclair's catalogue also notes less obvious quotations of Beethoven's
Hammerklavier
Sonata
and various other works.
[
26
]

Another notable piece of orchestral music Ives completed was his
Symphony No. 4
, which he worked on from 1910 to 1916, with further revisions in the 1920s. This four-movement symphony is notable for its complexity and vast orchestra. A complete performance of the work was not given until 1965, half a century after it was completed and over a decade after Ives's death.

Ives left behind material for an unfinished
Universe Symphony
, which he was unable to complete despite two decades of work. This was due to his health problems as well as his shifting ideas of the work.

Ives's music was largely ignored during his life, particularly during the years in which he actively composed. Many of his published works went unperformed even many years after his death in 1954. However, his reputation in more recent years has greatly increased. The
Juilliard School
commemorated the fiftieth anniversary of his death by performing his music over six days in 2004. His musical experiments, including his increasing use of
dissonance
, were not well received by his contemporaries. The difficulties in performing the rhythmic complexities in his major orchestral works made them daunting challenges even decades after they were composed.

Early supporters of Ives's music included
Henry Cowell
,
Elliott Carter
, and
Aaron Copland
. Cowell's periodical
New Music
published a substantial number of Ives's scores (with his approval). But for nearly 40 years, Ives had few performances of his music that he did not personally arrange or financially back. He generally used
Nicolas Slonimsky
as the conductor.
[
24
]
After seeing a copy of Ives's self-published
114 Songs
during the 1930s, Copland published a newspaper article praising the collection.

Ives began to acquire some public recognition during the 1930s, with performances of a chamber orchestra version of his
Three Places in New England
, both in the US and on tour in Europe by conductor Nicolas Slonimsky.
The Town Hall (New York City)
premiered his
Concord Sonata
in 1939, featuring pianist
John Kirkpatrick
. This received favorable commentary in the major New York newspapers. Later, around the time of Ives's death in 1954, Kirkpatrick teamed with soprano
Helen Boatwright
for the first extended recorded recital of Ives's songs for the obscure Overtone label (Overtone Records catalog number 7). They recorded a new selection of songs for the Ives Centennial Collection that
Columbia Records
published in 1974.

In the 1940s, Ives met
Lou Harrison
, a fan of his music who began to edit and promote it. Most notably, Harrison conducted the premiere of the
Symphony No. 3,
The Camp Meeting
(1904) in 1946.
[
27
]
The next year, it won Ives the
Pulitzer Prize for Music
. He gave the prize money away (half of it to Harrison), saying "prizes are for boys, and I'm all grown up".
[
28
]

Ives was a generous financial supporter of twentieth-century music, often financing works that were written by other composers. This he did in secret, telling his beneficiaries that his wife wanted him to do so.
[
29
]
Nicolas Slonimsky
said in 1971, "He financed my entire career".
[
30
]

At this time, Ives was also promoted by
Bernard Herrmann
, who worked as a conductor at CBS and in 1940 became principal conductor of the
CBS Symphony Orchestra
. While there, he championed Ives's music. When they met, Herrmann confessed that he had tried his hand at performing the
Concord Sonata
. Ives, who avoided the radio and the phonograph, agreed to make a series of piano recordings from 1933 to 1943. One of the more unusual recordings, made in New York City in 1943, features Ives playing the piano and singing the words to his popular World War I song "They Are There!", which he composed in 1917. He revised it in 1942–43 for
World War II
.

Ives's piano recordings were later issued in 1974 by
Columbia Records
on a special LP set for his centenary.
New World Records
issued 42 tracks of his recordings on CD on April 1, 2006, as
Ives Plays Ives
.

In Canada in the 1950s, the expatriate English pianist
Lloyd Powell
played a series of concerts including all of Ives's piano works, at the
University of British Columbia
.
[
31
]

Recognition of Ives's music steadily increased. He received praise from
Arnold Schoenberg
, who regarded him as a monument to artistic integrity, and from the New York School of
William Schuman
. Shortly after Schoenberg's death (three years before Ives died), his widow found a note written by her husband. The note had originally been written in 1944 when Schoenberg was living in Los Angeles and teaching at UCLA. It said: "There is a great Man living in this Country – a composer. He has solved the problem how to preserve one's self-esteem and to learn [
sic
]. He responds to negligence by contempt. He is not forced to accept praise or blame. His name is Ives."
[
32
]

Ives reportedly also won the admiration of
Gustav Mahler
, who said that he was a true musical revolutionary. Mahler was said to have talked of premiering Ives's third symphony with the
New York Philharmonic
, but he died in 1911 before conducting this premiere. The source of this account was Ives; since Mahler died, there was no way to verify whether he had seen the score of the symphony or decided to perform it in the 1911–12 season.
[
33
]
Ives regularly attended
New York Philharmonic
concerts and probably heard Mahler conduct the Philharmonic at
Carnegie Hall
.

In 1951,
Leonard Bernstein
conducted the world premiere of Ives's
Symphony No. 2
in a broadcast concert by the New York Philharmonic. The Iveses heard the performance on their cook's radio and were amazed at the audience's warm reception to the music. Bernstein continued to conduct Ives's music and made a number of recordings with the Philharmonic for Columbia Records. He honored Ives on one of his
televised youth concerts
and in a special disc included with the reissue of the 1960 recording of the second symphony and the "Fourth of July" movement from Ives's
Holiday Symphony
.

Another pioneering Ives recording, undertaken during the 1950s, was the first complete set of the four violin sonatas, performed by Minneapolis Symphony concertmaster Rafael Druian and John Simms.
Leopold Stokowski
took on
Symphony No. 4
in 1965, regarding the work as "the heart of the Ives problem". The Carnegie Hall world premiere by the
American Symphony Orchestra
led to the first recording of the music. Another promoter of his was choral conductor Gregg Smith, who made a series of recordings of his shorter works during the 1960s. These included the first stereo recordings of the psalm settings and arrangements of many short pieces for theater orchestra. The
Juilliard String Quartet
recorded the two string quartets during the 1960s.

In the early 21st century, conductor
Michael Tilson Thomas
is an enthusiastic exponent of Ives's symphonies, as is composer and biographer
Jan Swafford
. Ives's work is regularly programmed in Europe. He has also inspired pictorial artists, most notably
Eduardo Paolozzi
, who entitled one of his 1970s sets of
prints
Calcium Light Night
, each print being named for an Ives piece (including
Central Park in the Dark
). In 1991,
Connecticut
's legislature designated Ives as that state's official composer.
[
34
]

The Scottish baritone
Henry Herford
began a survey of Ives's songs in 1990, but this remains incomplete. The record company involved (
Unicorn-Kanchana
) collapsed. Pianist-composer and
Wesleyan University
professor
Neely Bruce
has made a life's study of Ives. To date, he has staged seven parts of a concert series devoted to the complete songs of Ives. Musicologist David Gray Porter reconstructed a piano concerto, the
"Emerson" Concerto
, from Ives's sketches. A recording of the work was released by
Naxos Records
.

American singer and composer
Frank Zappa
included Charles Ives in a list of influences that he presented in the liner notes of his debut album
Freak Out!
(1966). Ives continues to influence contemporary composers, arrangers and musicians.
Planet Arts Records
released
Mists: Charles Ives for Jazz Orchestra
.
Ives befriended and encouraged a young
Elliott Carter
. In addition,
Phil Lesh
, bassist of the
Grateful Dead
, described Ives as one of his two musical heroes.
[
35
]
Jazz musician
Albert Ayler
also named Charles Ives as an influence in a 1970 interview with
Swing Journal
.

American microtonal musician and composer
Johnny Reinhard
reconstructed and performed
Universe symphony
in 1996.
[
36
]
[
37
]

The Unanswered Ives
is an hour-long film documentary directed by
Anne-Kathrin Peitz
and produced by Accentus Music (Leipzig, Germany). This was released in 2018 and shown on Swedish and German television stations; it features interviews with
Jan Swafford
,
John Adams
,
James Sinclair
and
Jack Cooper
.
[
38
]

In 1965, Ives won a
Grammy Award
for his composition Symphony No. 4 and the
American Symphony Orchestra
won for their recording of the work. Ives had previously been nominated in 1964 for "New England Holidays" and in 1960 for Symphony No. 2.
[
39
]

Igor Stravinsky
praised Ives. In 1966 he said: "[Ives] was exploring the 1960s during the heyday of
Strauss
and
Debussy
.
Polytonality
;
atonality
;
tone clusters
; perspectivistic effects;
chance
; statistical composition; permutation; add-a-part, practical-joke, and improvisatory music: these were Ives’s discoveries a half-century ago as he quietly set about devouring the contemporary cake before the rest of us even found a seat at the same table."
[
40
]

John Cage
expressed his admiration for Ives in "Two Statements on Ives", writing "I think that Ives's relevance increases as time goes on"
[
41
]
and stating that "his contribution to American music was in every sense 'not only spiritual, by also concretely musical.' Nowadays everything I hear by Ives delights me."
[
42
]
Cage recalled that during the 1930s, he was "not interested in Ives because of the inclusion in his music of aspects of American folk and popular material".
[
43
]
but that once he began to focus on indeterminacy, he "was able to approach Ives in an entirely different... spirit."
[
43
]
Cage noted that Ives "knew that if sound sources came from different points in space that that fact was in itself interesting. Nobody before him had thought about this..."
[
43
]
and stated that "the freedom that he gave to a performer saying Do this or do that according to your choice is directly in line with present indeterminate music."
[
44
]
Cage also expressed his interest in what he called the "mud of Ives",
[
45
]
by which he meant "the part that is not referential..."
[
45
]
from which arises a "complex superimposition [of] lines that makes a web in which we cannot clearly perceive anything..."
[
45
]
leading to "the possibility of not knowing what's happening..."
[
45
]
Cage wrote that "more and more... I think this experience of non-knowledge is more useful and more important to us than the Renaissance notion of knowing A B C D E F..."
[
45
]
Cage also praised Ives's "understanding... of inactivity and of silence..."
[
45
]
and recalled having read an essay in which:

In the summer of 2019, the Charles Ives Music Festival was established in
Fairfield County, Connecticut
. The festival is an annual event with a focus on classical music, chamber concerts, and educational programs, as well as an affiliation with the
Western Connecticut Youth Orchestra
.
[
47
]
Concerts primarily feature the music and honor the legacy of Ives.
[
48
]

Conductor
Gustavo Dudamel
and the
Los Angeles Philharmonic
won a Grammy Award for Best Orchestral Performance for
Ives's Complete Symphonies
(
Deutsche Grammophon
, recorded in 2020).
[
49
]

There is evidence that Ives backdated his scores to sound more modern than he really was. This was first proposed by
Maynard Solomon
, an advocate of Ives's music.
[
50
]
This has, in turn, generated some controversy and puzzlement.
[
51
]
[
52
]

Note: Because Ives often made several different versions of the same piece, and because his work was generally ignored during his life, it is often difficult to put exact dates on his compositions. The dates given here are sometimes best guesses. There have also been controversial speculations that he purposefully misdated his own pieces earlier or later than actually written.

Ives proposed in 1920 that there be a 20th amendment to the U.S. Constitution which would authorize citizens to submit legislative proposals to Congress. Members of Congress would then cull the proposals, selecting 10 each year as referendums for popular vote by the nation's electorate. He even had printed at his own expense several thousand copies of a pamphlet on behalf of his proposed amendment. The pamphlet proclaimed the need to curtail "THE EFFECTS OF TOO MUCH POLITICS IN OUR representative DEMOCRACY". He planned to distribute the pamphlets at the
1920 Republican National Convention
, but they arrived from the printer after the convention had ended.
[
54
]

It is stated in the biographical film
A Good Dissonance Like a Man
that the first of Ives's crippling heart attacks occurred as a result of a
World War I
-era argument with a young
Franklin D. Roosevelt
over his idea of issuing of war bonds in amounts as low as $50 each. Roosevelt was chairman of a war bonds committee on which Ives served, and he "scorned the idea of anything so useless as a $50 bond". Roosevelt changed his mind about small contributions as seen many years later when he endorsed the
March of Dimes
to combat poliomyelitis.
[
55
]

Charles Ives and his wife Harmony (née Twichell) Ives were the subjects of the opera
Harmony
(2021) by Robert Carl and Russell Banks, which was premiered by the Seagle Festival in August 2021.
[
56
]
Charles Ives was played  by baritone Joel Clemens and Harmony Twitchell was played by soprano Victoria Erickson.
[
57
]

My Father Knew Charles Ives
is an
orchestral
triptych
by the American composer
John Adams
. The piece was commissioned by the
San Francisco Symphony
under conductor
Michael Tilson Thomas
, and serves as an autobiography and homage to Ives.
[
58
]
[
59
]
While Adam's father didn't actually have relation to Ives, the piece finds connection between the lives of Adams and Ives, both of whom grew up in rural
New England
.
[
59
]

---

## Sources

✓ **Wikipedia**: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charles_Ives

*Scraped on 2025-12-25 01:08 UTC*