---
composer_id: 7e7c4ac1-6d28-446e-8a3d-030edc9539cf
name: Guillaume de Machaut
normalized_name: Machaut, Guillaume de
birth_year: 1300
death_year: 1377
era: Medieval
nationality: French
scraped_date: 2025-12-25
sources:
  wikipedia: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guillaume_de_Machaut
file_version: 1
---

---

# Guillaume de Machaut (1300-1377)

---

**Era:** Medieval
**Nationality:** French

---

## Biography

Guillaume de Machaut
(
French:
[ɡijom
də
maʃo]
,
Old French:
[ɡiˈʎawmə
də
maˈtʃaw(θ)]
; also
Machau
and
Machault
;
c.
1300
– April 1377
[
n 1
]
) was a French composer and poet who was the central figure of the
ars nova
style in late
medieval music
. His dominance of the genre is such that modern
musicologists
use his death to separate the
ars nova
from the subsequent
ars subtilior
movement.
[
8
]
Regarded as the most significant French composer and poet of the 14th century,
[
9
]
[
10
]
he is often seen as the century's leading European composer.
[
3
]

Machaut, one of the earliest European composers on whom considerable biographical information is available, has an
unprecedented amount of surviving music
, in part due to his own involvement in his manuscripts' creation and preservation.
[
3
]
Machaut embodies the culmination of the poet-composer tradition stretching back to the traditions of
troubadour
and
trouvère
.
[
9
]
His poetry was greatly admired and imitated by other poets, including
Geoffrey Chaucer
and
Eustache Deschamps
,
[
11
]
well into the 15th century.
[
10
]

Machaut composed in a wide range of styles and forms and was crucial in developing the
motet
and secular song forms (particularly the
lai
and the
formes fixes
:
rondeau
,
virelai
and
ballade
). Among his only surviving
sacred
works,
Messe de Nostre Dame
, is the earliest known complete
setting
of the
Ordinary of the Mass
attributable to a single composer. Other notable works include the rondeaux "Ma fin est mon commencement" and "Rose, liz, printemps, verdure" as well as the virelai "
Douce Dame Jolie
".

Guillaume de Machaut was born around 1300, one of seven children, and educated in the region around
Reims
. His surname most likely derives from the nearby town of
Machault
, 30 km northeast of Reims in the
Ardennes
region.
He was employed as secretary to
John I
, Count of
Luxembourg
and King of
Bohemia
from 1323 to 1346, and also became a
canon
(1337). He often accompanied King John on his various trips, many of them military expeditions around Europe (including
Prague
). He was named the canon of
Verdun
in 1330,
Arras
in 1332, and Reims in 1337. In 1346, King John was killed fighting at the
Battle of Crécy
, and Machaut, who was famous and much in demand, entered the service of various other aristocrats and rulers, including King John's daughter
Bonne
(who died of the
Black Death
in 1349), her sons
Jean de Berry
and Charles (later
Charles V
, Duke of Normandy), and others such as
Charles II of Navarre
.
[
12
]

Machaut survived the Black Death that devastated Europe, and spent his later years living in Reims composing and supervising the creation of his complete-works manuscripts. His poem
Le voir dit
(probably 1361–1365) purports to recount a late love affair with a 19-year-old girl, Péronne d'Armentières, although the accuracy of the work as autobiography is contested.
[
13
]

Machaut died sometime in 1377, perhaps during April.
[
n 1
]

Machaut's music comprises a wide variety, from complex masses to short songs, and despite the differences of genre, most still contain "typical Machaut motifs".
[
14
]
He lived after the flowering of both the secular
troubadour
and
trouvère
song movements and the
ars antiqua
church style.
[
citation needed
]
The musicologist
Gilbert Reaney
notes that "before [Machaut], composers either wrote songs or church music. Machaut did both, though it could be said that he neglected the area of liturgical church music."
[
15
]
Besides his mass, Hoquetus
David
and a few Latin motets, Machaut's surviving output is exclusively secular.
[
14
]
[
n 2
]
Regardless, Reaney notes that his unique mastery of both secular and sacred Western music is only precedented by the work of
Adam de la Halle
.
[
15
]

The lyrics of Machaut's works almost always dealt with
courtly love
. A few works exist to commemorate a particular event, such as M18, "Bone Pastor/Bone Pastor/Bone Pastor." Machaut mostly composed in five genres: the lai, the virelai, the motet, the ballade, and the rondeau. In these genres, Machaut retained the basic
formes fixes
, but often utilized creative text setting and
cadences
. For example, most rondeau phrases end with a long
melisma
on the penultimate syllable. However, a few of Machaut's rondeaux, such as R18 "Puis qu'en oubli", are mostly syllabic in treatment.

Machaut's motets often contain sacred texts in the tenor, such as in M12 "Corde mesto cantando/Helas! pour quoy virent/Libera me". The top two voices in these three-part compositions, in contrast, sing secular French texts, creating interesting concordances between the sacred and secular. In his other genres, though, he does not utilize sacred texts.

Machaut's cyclic setting of the Mass, identified in one source as the
Messe de Nostre Dame
(
Mass of Our Lady
), was composed in the early 1360s probably for
Rheims Cathedral
.  While not the first cyclic mass – the
Tournai Mass
is earlier – it was the first by a single composer and conceived as a unit.  Machaut was probably familiar with the Tournai Mass since Machaut's Mass shares many stylistic features with it, including textless interludes.

Whether or not Machaut's mass is indeed
cyclic
is contested; after lengthy debate, musicologists are still deeply divided. However, there is a consensus that this mass is at best a forerunner to the later 15th-century cyclic masses by the likes of
Josquin des Prez
. Machaut's mass differs from these in the following ways: (1) he does not hold a
tonal centre
throughout the entire work, as the mass uses two distinct
modes
(one for the Kyrie, Gloria, and Credo, another for Sanctus, Agnus and Ite missa est); (2) there is no extended melodic
theme
that clearly runs through all the movements, and the mass does not use the
parody
technique; (3) there is considerable evidence that this mass was not composed in one creative act. The fact that the movements were placed together does not mean they were conceived as such.
[
16
]

Nevertheless, the mass can be said to be stylistically consistent, and certainly the chosen chants are all celebrations of Mary, the mother of Jesus. Also adding weight to the claim that the mass is cyclic is the possibility that the piece was written or assembled for performance at a specific celebration. The possibility that it was for the coronation of
Charles V
, which was once widely accepted, is thought unlikely in modern scholarship. The composer's intention that the piece be performed as one entire mass setting makes the
Messe de Nostre Dame
generally considered a cyclic composition.

Guillaume de Machaut's lyric output comprises around 400 poems, including 235 ballades, 76 rondeaux, 39 virelais, 24 lais, 10
complaintes
, and 7
chansons royales
, and Machaut did much to perfect and codify these fixed forms.  Some of his lyric output is embedded in his narrative poems or "dits", such as
Le remède de fortune
("The Cure of Ill Fortune") which includes one of each genre of lyric poetry, and
Le voir dit
("A True Story"), but most are included in a separate, unordered section entitled
Les loanges des dames
.  That the majority of his lyrics are not set to music (in manuscripts, music and non-music sections are separate) suggests that he normally wrote the text before setting some to music.

Other than his Latin motets of a religious nature and some poems invoking the horrors of war and captivity, the vast majority of Machaut's lyric poems reflect the conventions of
courtly love
, and involve statements of service to a lady and the poet's pleasure and pains.  In technical terms, Machaut was a master of elaborate rhyme schemes, and this concern makes him a precursor to the
Grands Rhétoriqueurs
of the 15th century.

Guillaume de Machaut's narrative output is dominated by the "dit" (literally "spoken", i.e. a poem not meant to be sung).  These first-person
narrative poems
(all but one are written in
octosyllabic
rhymed couplets
, like the
romance, or "roman"
of the same period) follow many of the conventions of the
Roman de la rose
, including the use of
allegorical
dreams (
songes
), allegorical characters, and the situation of the narrator-lover attempting to return toward or satisfy his lady.

Machaut is also the author of a poetic chronicle of the chivalric deeds of
Peter I of Cyprus
, (the
Prise d'Alexandrie
), and of poetic works of consolation and moral philosophy. His unusual self-reflective usage of himself (as his lyrical persona) as the narrator of his dits yields  some personal philosophical insights as well.

At the end of his life, Machaut wrote a poetic treatise on his craft (his
Prologue
). This reflects on his conception of the organization of poetry into set genres and rhyme schemes, and the ordering of these genres into distinct sections of manuscripts. This preoccupation with ordering his
oeuvre
is reflected in an index to MS A entitled "Vesci l'ordonance que G. de Machaut veut qu'il ait en son livre" ("Here is the order that G. de Machaut wants his book to have").
[
17
]

The poem below,
Puis qu'en oubli
, is his 18th rondeau.

When he died in 1377, other composers such as
F. Andrieu
wrote elegies lamenting his death.

Machaut's poetry had a direct effect on the works of
Eustache Deschamps
,
Jean Froissart
,
Christine de Pizan
,
René d'Anjou
and
Geoffrey Chaucer
, among many others.
[
citation needed
]
There exists the hypothetical (though improbable) possibility that Chaucer and Machaut could have met when Chaucer was taken prisoner near Reims in 1359, or in
Calais
in 1360, with both poets on official business for the ratification of the
Treaty of Brétigny
(Machaut with his patron Jean de Berry, who was departing for England, and Chaucer as a messenger to
Prince Lionel
).
[
19
]

According to food historian William Woys Weaver, fourteenth century nobles at the French-speaking
Lusignan
court in
Nicosia
,
Cyprus
, often listened to narrations of Machaut's
Prise d’Alexandrie
for entertainment during royal banquets. Tales like Machaut's, about heroic
Crusader
figures, reinforced the self-image that Lusignan courtiers cultivated as long-distance claimants to
Jerusalem
.
[
20
]

See
Clark 2012
and
Earp 2011
for extensive bibliographies

---

## Sources

✓ **Wikipedia**: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guillaume_de_Machaut

*Scraped on 2025-12-25 01:09 UTC*