---
composer_id: 71973ed3-7691-4f84-8293-07f593af3260
name: Hildegard von Bingen
normalized_name: Hildegard von Bingen
birth_year: 1098
death_year: 1179
era: Medieval
nationality: German
scraped_date: 2025-12-25
sources:
  wikipedia: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hildegard_of_Bingen
file_version: 1
---

---

# Hildegard von Bingen (1098-1179)

---

**Era:** Medieval
**Nationality:** German

---

## Biography

Hildegard of Bingen
OSB
(
German
:
Hildegard von Bingen
,
pronounced
[ˈhɪldəɡaʁt
fɔn
ˈbɪŋən]
;
Latin
:
Hildegardis Bingensis
;
c.
1098
– 17 September 1179), also known as  the
Sibyl of the Rhine
, was a German
Benedictine
abbess
and
polymath
active as a writer, composer, philosopher,
mystic
,
visionary
, and as a medical writer and practitioner during the
High Middle Ages
.
[
1
]
[
2
]
She is one of the best-known composers of sacred
monophony
, as well as the most recorded in modern history.
[
3
]
She has been considered by a number of scholars to be the founder of scientific
natural history
in Germany.
[
4
]

Hildegard's convent at Disibodenberg
elected her as
magistra
(
mother superior
) in 1136. She founded the monasteries of
Rupertsberg
in 1150 and
Eibingen
in 1165. Hildegard wrote theological, botanical, and medicinal works,
[
5
]
as well as letters,
hymns
, and
antiphons
for the
liturgy
.
[
2
]
She wrote poems, and supervised miniature
illuminations
in the Rupertsberg
manuscript
of her first work,
Scivias
.
[
6
]
There are more surviving chants by Hildegard than by any other composer from the entire Middle Ages, and she is one of the few known composers to have written both the music and the words.
[
7
]
One of her works, the
Ordo Virtutum
, is an early example of liturgical drama and arguably the oldest surviving
morality play
.
[
a
]
She is noted for the invention of a
constructed language
known as
Lingua Ignota
.

Although the history of her formal
canonization
is complicated, regional calendars of the
Catholic Church
have listed her as a saint for centuries. On 10 May 2012,
Pope Benedict XVI
extended the liturgical cult of Hildegard to the entire Catholic Church in a process known as "
equivalent canonization
". On 7 October 2012, he named her a
Doctor of the Church
, in recognition of "her holiness of life and the originality of her teaching."
[
8
]

Hildegard was born around 1098. Her parents were Mechtild of Merxheim-Nahet and Hildebert of Bermersheim, a family of the free lower nobility in the service of the Count Meginhard of
Sponheim
.
[
9
]
Sickly from birth, Hildegard is traditionally considered their youngest and tenth child,
[
10
]
although there are records of only seven older siblings.
[
11
]
[
12
]
In her
Vita
, Hildegard states that from a very young age she experienced
visions
.
[
13
]

From early childhood, long before she undertook her public mission or even her monastic vows, Hildegard's spiritual awareness was grounded in what she called the
umbra viventis lucis
, the reflection of the living Light. Her letter to
Guibert of Gembloux
, which she wrote at the age of 77, describes her experience of this light:

Perhaps because of Hildegard's visions or as a method of political positioning, or both, Hildegard's parents offered her as an
oblate
to the
Benedictine
monastery at
Disibodenberg
, which had been recently reformed in the
Palatinate Forest
. The date of Hildegard's
enclosure
at the monastery is the subject of debate. Her
Vita
says she was eight years old when she was professed with
Jutta
, who was the daughter of Count
Stephan II of Sponheim
and about six years older than Hildegard.
[
15
]
Jutta's date of enclosure is known to have been in 1112, when Hildegard would have been 14.
[
16
]
Their vows were received by Bishop
Otto of Bamberg
on All Saints Day 1112. Some scholars speculate that Hildegard was placed in the care of Jutta at the age of eight, and that the two of them were then enclosed together six years later.
[
17
]

In any case, Hildegard and Jutta were enclosed together at Disibodenberg and formed the core of a growing community of women attached to the monastery of monks, named a
Frauenklause,
a type of female hermitage. Jutta was also a visionary and thus attracted many followers who came to visit her at the monastery. Hildegard states that Jutta taught her to read and write, but that she was unlearned, and therefore incapable of teaching Hildegard sound Biblical interpretation.
[
18
]
The written record of the
Life of Jutta
indicates that Hildegard probably assisted her in reciting the psalms, working in the garden, other handiwork, and tending to the sick.
[
19
]
This might have been a time when Hildegard learned how to play the ten-stringed
psaltery
.
Volmar
, a frequent visitor, may have taught Hildegard simple psalm notation. The time she studied music could have been the beginning of the compositions she would later create.
[
20
]

Upon Jutta's death in 1136, Hildegard was unanimously elected as
magistra
of the community by her fellow nuns.
[
21
]
Abbot Kuno of Disibodenberg asked Hildegard to be
prioress
, which would be under his authority. Hildegard, wanting more independence for herself and her nuns, asked Abbot Kuno to allow them to move to
Rupertsberg
.
[
22
]
This was to be a move toward poverty, from a stone complex that was well established to a temporary dwelling place. When the abbot declined Hildegard's proposition, Hildegard went over his head and received the approval of
Archbishop Henry I of Mainz
. Abbot Kuno did not relent, however, until Hildegard was stricken by an illness that rendered her paralyzed and unable to move from her bed, an event that she attributed to God's unhappiness at her not following his orders to move her nuns to Rupertsberg. It was only when the Abbot himself could not move Hildegard that he decided to grant the nuns their own monastery.
[
23
]
Hildegard and approximately 20 nuns thus moved to the St. Rupertsberg monastery in 1150, where
Volmar
served as provost, as well as Hildegard's confessor and scribe. In 1165, Hildegard founded a second monastery for her nuns at
Eibingen
.
[
24
]

Before Hildegard's death in 1179, a problem arose with the clergy of Mainz: a man buried in Rupertsberg had died after excommunication from the Catholic Church. Therefore, the clergy wanted to remove his body from the sacred ground. Hildegard did not accept this idea, replying that it was a sin and that the man had been reconciled to the church at the time of his death.
[
25
]

While completing
Scivias
, Hildegard found a close friend and personal assistant in
Richardis von Stade
, a fellow nun. In 1151, Richardis was elected abbess of a distant convent, much to Hildegard's displeasure. In a series of letters to multiple church officials (the Pope included), Richardis' family, and even Richardis herself, Hildegard pleaded for her companion to be allowed to stay with her.
[
26
]
Hildegard remained adamant that it was "not God's will" for Richardis and her to be separated.
[
27
]

Despite Hildegard's efforts, Richardis was eventually moved. A year later, Richardis' brother sent Hildegard a letter notifying her that Richardis had died, and had met "a good Christian end".
[
28
]
In response to this, Hildegard grieved the death of her friend, and assured her brother that she was confident in Richardis' salvation, and that she cherished Richardis with "divine love".
[
29
]

Hildegard said that she first saw "The Shade of the Living Light" at the age of three, and by the age of five, she began to understand that she was experiencing visions.
[
30
]
She used the term
visio
(Latin for 'vision') to describe this feature of her experience and she recognized that it was a gift that she could not explain to others. Hildegard explained that she saw all things in the light of God through the five senses: sight, hearing, taste, smell, and touch.
[
31
]
Hildegard was hesitant to share her visions, confiding only to
Jutta
, who in turn told Volmar, Hildegard's tutor and, later, secretary.
[
32
]
Throughout her life, she continued to have many visions, and in 1141, at the age of 42, Hildegard received a vision she believed to be an instruction from God, to "write down that which you see and hear."
[
33
]
Still hesitant to record her visions, Hildegard became physically ill. The illustrations recorded in the book of
Scivias
were visions that Hildegard experienced, causing her great suffering and tribulations.
[
34
]
In her first theological text,
Scivias
("Know the Ways"), Hildegard describes her struggle within:

It was between November 1147 and February 1148 at the synod in Trier that
Pope Eugenius
heard about Hildegard's writings. It was from this that she received papal approval to document her visions as revelations from the Holy Spirit, giving her instant credence.
[
36
]

On 17 September 1179, when Hildegard died, her sisters said they saw two streams of light appear in the skies and cross over the room where she was dying.
[
37
]

Hildegard's
hagiography
,
Vita Sanctae Hildegardis
, was compiled by the monk Theoderic of Echternach after Hildegard's death.
[
38
]
He included the hagiographical work
Libellus
, or "Little Book", begun by Godfrey of Disibodenberg.
[
39
]
Godfrey had died before he was able to complete his work. Guibert of Gembloux was invited to finish the work; however, he had to return to his monastery with the project unfinished.
[
40
]
Theoderic utilized sources Guibert had left behind to complete the
Vita
.

Hildegard's works include three great volumes of visionary theology;
[
42
]
a variety of musical compositions for use in the liturgy, as well as the musical morality play
Ordo Virtutum
; one of the largest bodies of letters (nearly 400) to survive from the
Middle Ages
, addressed to correspondents ranging from
popes
to
emperors
to
abbots
and
abbesses
, and including records of many of the sermons she preached in the 1160s and 1170s;
[
43
]
two volumes of material on natural medicine and cures;
[
44
]
[
45
]
an
invented language
called the
lingua ignota
('unknown language');
[
46
]
and various minor works, including a gospel commentary and two works of hagiography.
[
47
]

Several manuscripts of her works were produced during her lifetime, including the illustrated Rupertsberg manuscript of her first major work,
Scivias
; the
Dendermonde Codex
, which contains one version of her musical works; and the Ghent manuscript, which was the first fair-copy made for editing of her final theological work, the
Liber Divinorum Operum
. At the end of her life, and probably under her initial guidance, all of her works were edited and gathered into the single Riesenkodex manuscript.
[
48
]
[
49
]
The
Riesenkodex manuscript
is a collection of 481 folios of vellum bound in pig leather over wooden boards that measure 45 by 30 centimetres (18 by 12 in).
[
50
]

Hildegard's most significant works were her three volumes of visionary theology:
Scivias
("Know the Ways", composed 1142–1151),
Liber Vitae Meritorum
("Book of Life's Merits" or "Book of the Rewards of Life", composed 1158–1163); and
Liber Divinorum Operum
("Book of Divine Works", also known as
De operatione Dei
, "On God's Activity", begun around 1163 or 1164 and completed around 1172 or 1174). In these volumes, the last of which was completed when she was well into her seventies, Hildegard first describes each vision, whose details are often strange and enigmatic, and then interprets their theological contents in the words of the "voice of the Living Light."
[
51
]

With permission from Abbot Kuno of Disibodenberg, she began journaling visions she had (which is the basis for
Scivias
).
Scivias
is a contraction of
Sci vias Domini
('Know the Ways of the Lord'), and it was Hildegard's first major visionary work, and one of the biggest milestones in her life. Perceiving a divine command to "write down what you see and hear,"
[
52
]
Hildegard began to record and interpret her visionary experiences. In total, 26 visionary experiences were captured in this compilation.
[
36
]

Scivias
is structured into three parts of unequal length. The first part (six visions) chronicles the order of God's creation: the Creation and Fall of Adam and Eve, the structure of the universe (described as the shape of an "egg"), the relationship between body and soul, God's relationship to his people through the Synagogue, and the choirs of angels. The second part (seven visions) describes the order of redemption: the coming of Christ the Redeemer, the
Trinity
, the church as the Bride of Christ and the Mother of the Faithful in
baptism
and
confirmation
, the orders of the church, Christ's sacrifice on the cross and the
Eucharist
, and the fight against the devil. Finally, the third part (thirteen visions) recapitulates the history of salvation told in the first two parts, symbolized as a building adorned with various allegorical figures and virtues. It concludes with the Symphony of Heaven, an early version of Hildegard's musical compositions.
[
53
]

In early 1148, a commission was sent by the Pope to
Disibodenberg
to find out more about Hildegard and her writings. The commission found that the visions were authentic and returned to the Pope, with a portion of the
Scivias
. Portions of the uncompleted work were read aloud to
Pope Eugenius III
at the Synod of Trier in 1148, after which he sent Hildegard a letter with his blessing.
[
54
]
This blessing was later construed as papal approval for all of Hildegard's wide-ranging theological activities.
[
55
]
Towards the end of her life, Hildegard commissioned a richly decorated manuscript of
Scivias
(the Rupertsberg Codex); although the original has been lost since its evacuation to Dresden for safekeeping in 1945, its images are preserved in a hand-painted facsimile from the 1920s.
[
6
]

In her second volume of visionary theology,
Liber Vitae Meritorum
, composed between 1158 and 1163, after she had moved her community of nuns into independence at the Rupertsberg in Bingen, Hildegard tackled the moral life in the form of dramatic confrontations between the virtues and the vices. She had already explored this area in her musical morality play,
Ordo Virtutum
, and the "Book of the Rewards of Life" takes up the play's characteristic themes. Each vice, although ultimately depicted as ugly and grotesque, nevertheless offers alluring, seductive speeches that attempt to entice the unwary soul into their clutches. Standing in humankind's defence, however, are the sober voices of the Virtues, powerfully confronting every vicious deception.
[
56
]

Amongst the work's innovations is one of the earliest descriptions of purgatory as the place where each soul would have to work off its debts after death before entering heaven.
[
57
]
Hildegard's descriptions of the possible punishments there are often gruesome and grotesque, which emphasize the work's moral and pastoral purpose as a practical guide to the life of true penance and proper virtue.
[
58
]

Hildegard's last and grandest visionary work,
Liber divinorum operum
, had its genesis in one of the few times she experienced something like an ecstatic loss of consciousness. As she described it in an autobiographical passage included in her
Vita
, sometime in about 1163, she received "an extraordinary mystical vision" in which was revealed the "sprinkling drops of sweet rain" that she stated
John the Evangelist
experienced when he wrote, "In the beginning was the Word" (John 1:1).
[
b
]
Hildegard perceived that this Word was the key to the "Work of God", of which humankind is the pinnacle. The
Book of Divine Works
, therefore, became in many ways an extended explication of the prologue to the Gospel of John.
[
60
]

The ten visions of this work's three parts are cosmic in scale, to illustrate various ways of understanding the relationship between God and his creation. Often, that relationship is established by grand allegorical female figures representing Divine Love (
Caritas
) or Wisdom (
Sapientia
). The first vision opens the work with a salvo of poetic and visionary images, swirling about to characterize God's dynamic activity within the scope of his work within the history of salvation. The remaining three visions of the first part introduce the image of a human being standing astride the spheres that make up the universe and detail the intricate relationships between the human as microcosm and the universe as macrocosm. This culminates in the final chapter of Part One, Vision Four with Hildegard's commentary on the prologue to the Gospel of John (John 1:1–14), a direct rumination on the meaning of "In the beginning was the Word". The single vision that constitutes the whole of Part Two stretches that rumination back to the opening of Genesis, and forms an extended commentary on the seven days of the creation of the world told in Genesis 1–2:3. This commentary interprets each day of creation in three ways: literal or cosmological; allegorical or ecclesiological (i.e. related to the church's history); and moral or tropological (i.e. related to the soul's growth in virtue). Finally, the five visions of the third part take up again the building imagery of
Scivias
to describe the course of salvation history. The final vision (3.5) contains Hildegard's longest and most detailed prophetic program of the life of the church from her own days of "womanish weakness" through to the coming and ultimate downfall of the Antichrist.
[
61
]

Attention in recent decades to women of the medieval
Catholic Church
has led to a great deal of popular interest in Hildegard's music. In addition to the
Ordo Virtutum
, 69 musical compositions, each with its own original poetic text, survive, and at least four other texts are known, though their musical notation has been lost.
[
62
]
This is one of the largest repertoires among medieval composers.

One of her better-known works,
Ordo Virtutum
(
Play of the Virtues
), is a
morality play
. It is uncertain when some of Hildegard's compositions were composed, though the
Ordo Virtutum
is thought to have been composed as early as 1151.
[
63
]
It is an independent Latin morality play with music (82 songs); it does not supplement or pay homage to the Mass or the Office of a certain feast. It is, in fact, the earliest known surviving musical drama that is not attached to a
liturgy
.
[
7
]

The
Ordo virtutum
would have been performed within Hildegard's monastery by and for her select community of noblewomen and nuns. It was probably performed as a manifestation of the theology Hildegard delineated in the
Scivias
. The play serves as an allegory of the Christian story of sin, confession, repentance, and forgiveness. Notably, it is the female Virtues who restore the fallen to the community of the faithful, not the male Patriarchs or Prophets. This would have been a significant message to the nuns in Hildegard's convent. Scholars assert that the role of the Devil would have been played by Volmar, while Hildegard's nuns would have played the parts of Anima (the human souls) and the Virtues.
[
64
]
The devil's part is entirely spoken or shouted, with no musical setting. All other characters sing in monophonic plainchant. This includes patriarchs, prophets, a happy soul, an unhappy soul, and a penitent soul along with 16 virtues (including mercy, innocence, chastity, obedience, hope, and faith).
[
65
]
[
66
]

In addition to the
Ordo Virtutum
, Hildegard composed many liturgical songs that were collected into a cycle called the
Symphonia armoniae celestium revelationum
. The songs from the Symphonia are set to Hildegard's own text and range from antiphons, hymns, and sequences (such as
Columba Aspexit
), to responsories.
[
67
]
Her music is
monophonic
, consisting of exactly one melodic line.
[
68
]
Its style has been said to be characterized by soaring melodies that can push the boundaries of traditional Gregorian chant and to stand outside the normal practices of monophonic monastic chant.
[
69
]
Researchers are also exploring ways in which it may be viewed in comparison with her contemporaries, such as
Hermannus Contractus
.
[
70
]
Another feature of Hildegard's music that both reflects the 12th-century evolution of chant, and pushes that evolution further, is that it is highly
melismatic
, often with recurrent melodic units. Scholars such as
Margot Fassler
, Marianne Richert Pfau, and Beverly Lomer also note the intimate relationship between music and text in Hildegard's compositions, whose rhetorical features are often more distinct than is common in 12th-century chant.
[
71
]
As with most medieval chant notation, Hildegard's music lacks any indication of tempo or rhythm; the surviving manuscripts employ late German style notation, which uses very ornamental
neumes
.
[
72
]
The reverence for the Virgin Mary reflected in music shows how deeply influenced and inspired Hildegard of Bingen and her community were by the Virgin Mary and the saints.
[
73
]

Hildegard's medicinal and scientific writings, although thematically complementary to her ideas about nature expressed in her visionary works, are different in focus and scope. Neither claim to be rooted in her visionary experience and its divine authority. Rather, they spring from her experience helping in and then leading the monastery's herbal garden and infirmary, as well as the theoretical information she likely gained through her wide-ranging reading in the monastery's library.
[
45
]
As she gained practical skills in diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment, she combined physical treatment of physical diseases with holistic methods centered on "spiritual healing".
[
74
]
She became well known for her healing powers involving the practical application of tinctures, herbs, and precious stones.
[
75
]
She combined these elements with a theological notion ultimately derived from Genesis: all things put on earth are for the use of humans.
[
76
]
In addition to her hands-on experience, she also gained medical knowledge, including elements of her humoral theory, from traditional Latin texts.
[
74
]

Hildegard catalogued both her theory and practice in two works. The first,
Physica
, contains nine books that describe the scientific and medicinal properties of various plants, stones, fish, reptiles, and animals. This document is also thought to contain the first recorded reference of the use of hops in beer as a preservative.
[
77
]
[
78
]
The second,
Causae et Curae
, is an exploration of the human body, its connections to the rest of the natural world, and the causes and cures of various diseases.
[
79
]
Hildegard documented various medical practices in these books, including the use of bleeding and home remedies for many common ailments. She also explains remedies for common agricultural injuries such as burns, fractures, dislocations, and cuts.
[
74
]
Hildegard may have used the books to teach assistants at the monastery. These books are historically significant because they show areas of medieval medicine that were not well documented because their practitioners, mainly women, rarely wrote in Latin. Her writings were commentated on by
Mélanie Lipinska
, a Polish scientist.
[
80
]

In addition to its wealth of practical evidence,
Causae et Curae
is also noteworthy for its organizational scheme. Its first part sets the work within the context of the creation of the cosmos and then humanity as its summit, and the constant interplay of the human person as microcosm both physically and spiritually with the macrocosm of the universe informs all of Hildegard's approach.
[
45
]
Her hallmark is to emphasize the vital connection between the "green" health of the natural world and the holistic health of the human person.
Viriditas
, or greening power, was thought to sustain human beings and could be manipulated by adjusting the balance of elements within a person.
[
74
]
Thus, when she approached medicine as a type of gardening, it was not just as an analogy. Rather, Hildegard understood the plants and elements of the garden as direct counterparts to the humors and elements within the human body, whose imbalance led to illness and disease.
[
74
]

The nearly three hundred chapters of the second book of
Causae et Curae
"explore the etiology, or causes, of disease as well as human sexuality, psychology, and physiology."
[
45
]
In this section, she gives specific instructions for bleeding based on various factors, including gender, the phase of the moon (bleeding is best done when the moon is waning), the place of disease (use veins near diseased organ or body part) or prevention (big veins in arms), and how much blood to take (described in imprecise measurements, like "the amount that a thirsty person can swallow in one gulp"). She even includes bleeding instructions for animals to keep them healthy. In the third and fourth sections, Hildegard describes treatments for malignant and minor problems and diseases according to the humoral theory, again including information on animal health. The fifth section is about diagnosis and prognosis, which includes instructions to check the patient's blood, pulse, urine, and stool.
[
74
]
Finally, the sixth section documents a lunar horoscope to provide an additional means of prognosis for both disease and other medical conditions, such as conception and the outcome of pregnancy.
[
45
]
For example, she indicates that a waxing moon is good for human conception and is also good for sowing seeds for plants (sowing seeds is the plant equivalent of conception).
[
74
]
Elsewhere, Hildegard is even said to have stressed the value of boiling drinking water in an attempt to prevent infection.
[
81
]

As Hildegard elaborates the medical and scientific relationship between the human microcosm and the macrocosm of the universe, she often focuses on interrelated patterns of four: "the four elements (fire, air, water, and earth), the four seasons, the four humors, the four zones of the earth, and the four major winds."
[
45
]
Although she inherited the basic framework of
humoral theory
from ancient medicine, Hildegard's conception of the hierarchical inter-balance of the four humors (blood, phlegm, black bile, and yellow bile) was unique, based on their correspondence to "superior" and "inferior" elements – blood and phlegm corresponding to the "celestial" elements of fire and air, and the two biles corresponding to the "terrestrial" elements of water and earth. Hildegard understood the disease-causing imbalance of these humors to result from the improper dominance of the subordinate humors. This disharmony reflects that introduced by Adam and Eve in the Fall, which for Hildegard marked the indelible entrance of disease and humoral imbalance into humankind.
[
45
]
As she writes in
Causae et Curae
c. 42:

Hildegard also invented an
alternative alphabet
.
Litterae ignotae
('Alternate Alphabet') was another work and was more or less a secret code, or even an intellectual code – much like a modern crossword puzzle today.

Hildegard's
Lingua ignota
('unknown language') consisted of a series of invented words that corresponded to an eclectic list of nouns. The list is approximately 1,000 nouns; there are no other parts of speech.
[
83
]
The two most important sources for the
Lingua ignota
are the Wiesbaden, Hessische Landesbibliothek 2 (nicknamed the Riesenkodex)
[
83
]
and the Berlin manuscript.
[
46
]
In both manuscripts, medieval German and Latin glosses are written above Hildegard's invented words. The Berlin manuscript contains additional Latin and German glosses not found in the Riesenkodex.
[
46
]
The first two words of the
Lingua
as copied in the Berlin manuscript are
aigonz
(German,
goth
; Latin,
deus
; English,
god
) and
aleganz
(German,
engel
; Latin,
angelus
; English,
angel
).
[
84
]

Barbara Newman believes that Hildegard used her
Lingua ignota
to increase solidarity among her nuns.
[
85
]
Sarah Higley disagrees and notes that there is no evidence of Hildegard teaching the language to her nuns. She suggests that the language was not intended to remain a secret; rather, the presence of words for mundane things may indicate that the language was for the whole abbey and perhaps the larger monastic world.
[
46
]
Higley believes that "the Lingua is a linguistic distillation of the philosophy expressed in her three prophetic books: it represents the cosmos of divine and human creation and the sins that flesh is heir to."
[
46
]

The text of her writing and compositions reveals Hildegard's use of this form of modified medieval Latin, encompassing many invented, conflated, and abridged words.
[
13
]
Because of her inventions of words for her lyrics and use of a constructed script, many
conlangers
look upon her as a medieval precursor.
[
86
]

Maddocks claims that it is likely Hildegard learned simple Latin and the tenets of the Christian faith, but was not instructed in the Seven
Liberal Arts
, which formed the basis of all education for the learned classes in the Middle Ages: the
Trivium
of grammar, dialectic, and rhetoric plus the
Quadrivium
of arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, and music.
[
87
]
The correspondence she kept with the outside world, both spiritual and social, transcended the cloister as a space of spiritual confinement and served to document Hildegard's grand style and strict formatting of medieval letter writing.
[
88
]
[
89
]

Contributing to Christian European rhetorical traditions, Hildegard "authorized herself as a theologian" through alternative rhetorical arts.
[
88
]
Hildegard was creative in her interpretation of theology. She believed that her monastery should exclude novices who were not from the nobility because she did not want her community to be divided on the basis of social status.
[
90
]
She also stated that "woman may be made from man, but no man can be made without a woman."
[
37
]

Because of church limitation on public, discursive rhetoric, the medieval rhetorical arts included preaching, letter writing, poetry, and the encyclopedic tradition.
[
91
]
Hildegard's participation in these arts speaks to her significance as a female rhetorician, transcending bans on women's social participation and interpretation of scripture. The acceptance of public preaching by a woman, even a well-connected abbess and acknowledged prophet, does not fit the stereotype of this time. Her preaching was not limited to the monasteries; she preached publicly in 1160 in Germany.
[
92
]
She conducted four preaching tours throughout Germany, speaking to both clergy and laity in chapter houses and in public, mainly denouncing clerical corruption and calling for reform.
[
93
]

Many abbots and abbesses asked her for prayers and opinions on various matters.
[
1
]
She traveled widely during her four preaching tours.
[
94
]
She had several devoted followers, including Guibert of Gembloux, who wrote to her frequently and became her secretary after Volmar's death in 1173. Hildegard also influenced several monastic women, exchanging letters with
Elisabeth of Schönau
, a nearby visionary.
[
95
]

Hildegard corresponded with popes such as
Eugene III
and
Anastasius IV
, statesmen such as
Abbot Suger
, German emperors such as
Frederick I Barbarossa
, and other notable figures such as
Bernard of Clairvaux
, who advanced her work, at the behest of her abbot, Kuno, at the
Synod of Trier
in 1147 and 1148. Hildegard of Bingen's correspondence is an important component of her literary output.
[
96
]

Hildegard was one of the first persons for whom the Roman
canonization
process was officially applied, but the process took so long that four attempts at canonization were not completed and she remained at the level of her
beatification
. Her name was nonetheless included in the
Roman Martyrology
at the end of the 16th century up to the current 2004 edition, listing her as "Saint Hildegard" with her feast on 17 September, which would eventually be added to the
General Roman Calendar
as an optional memorial.
[
97
]
Numerous popes have referred to Hildegard as a saint, including
Pope John Paul II
[
98
]
and
Pope Benedict XVI
.
[
99
]
Hildegard's
pilgrimage church in Eibingen
houses her
relics
.
[
100
]

On 10 May 2012, Pope Benedict XVI extended the veneration of Saint Hildegard to the entire Catholic Church
[
101
]
in a process known as "equivalent canonization,"
[
102
]
thus laying the groundwork for naming her a
Doctor of the Church
.
[
103
]
On 7 October 2012, the
feast of the Holy Rosary
, the pope named her a Doctor of the Church.
[
104
]
He called Hildegard "perennially relevant" and "an authentic teacher of theology and a profound scholar of natural science and music."
[
105
]

Hildegard of Bingen also appears in the
calendar of saints
of various
Anglican
churches, such as
that
of the
Church of England
, in which she is
commemorated
on 17 September.
[
106
]
[
107
]

In recent years, Hildegard has become of particular interest to
feminist
scholars.
[
108
]
They note her reference to herself as a member of the weaker sex and her belittling of women.
[
109
]
Hildegard frequently referred to herself as an unlearned woman, completely incapable of Biblical exegesis.
[
110
]
Such a statement on her part, however, worked slyly to her advantage because it made her statements that all of her writings and music came from visions of the Divine more believable, therefore giving Hildegard the authority to speak in a time and place where few women were permitted a voice.
[
111
]
Hildegard used her voice to amplify the church's condemnation of
institutional corruption
, in particular
simony
.

Hildegard has also become a figure of reverence within the contemporary
New Age movement
, mostly because of her holistic and natural view of healing, as well as her status as a mystic. Although her medical writings were long neglected and then, studied without reference to their context,
[
112
]
she was the inspiration for Dr. Gottfried Hertzka's "Hildegard-Medicine", and is the namesake for
June Boyce-Tillman
's Hildegard Network, a healing center that focuses on a holistic approach to wellness and brings together people interested in exploring the links between spirituality, the arts, and healing.
[
113
]
Her reputation as a medicinal writer and healer was also used by early feminists to argue for women's rights to attend medical schools.
[
112
]

Reincarnation of Hildegard has been debated since 1924 when Austrian mystic
Rudolf Steiner
lectured that a nun of her description was the past life of Russian poet-philosopher
Vladimir Soloviev
,
[
114
]
whose visions of
Holy Wisdom
are often compared to Hildegard's.
[
115
]
Sophiologist
Robert Powell writes that
hermetic astrology
proves the match,
[
116
]
while mystical communities in Hildegard's lineage include that of artist Carl Schroeder
[
117
]
as studied by Columbia sociologist Courtney Bender
[
118
]
and supported by reincarnation researchers Walter Semkiw and Kevin Ryerson.
[
119
]

Recordings and performances of Hildegard's music have gained critical praise and popularity since 1979. There is an extensive
discography
of her musical works.

Hildegard of Bingen has also become of interest to modern scholars of queer medieval studies. One queer interpretation of Hildegard's work is that of the depictions of the side wound in
Scivias,
some have noted that the shape of the side wound appears very similar to that of a vulva, while others maintain that the shape was meant to be perceived as a mandorla, which was common for other depictions of Christ's wounds at the time.
[
120
]

In addition to potential queer readings of Hildegard's work as a mystic, there has also been interest in a queer reading of the relationship Hildegard of Bingen had with Richardis von Stade. The language used by Hildegard von Bingen to describe her relationship with Richardis von Stade, in addition to the fervor in which Hildegard expressed her disappointment in Richardis' appointment as abbess to another convent, and her attempts at drawing multiple other church officials to her aid in stopping this appointment, have led scholars of queer medieval studies to suspect that the relationship between Richardis and Hildegard might have been more than simply platonic.
[
121
]

Queer readings of Hildegard von Bingen have inspired a variety of works. In November of 2025, the LA Opera debuted a new opera called "Hildegard," which was inspired by the life of Hildegard von Bingen. The Opera was conceived by Sarah Kirkland Snider, who researched Hildegard and her work for eight years.
[
122
]

Hildegard's life story has also been portrayed in a 2009 film called
Vision: From the Life of Hildegard von Bingen
, where the relationship between Hildegard and Richardis is explored.
[
122
]

Additionally, Hildegard von Bingen served as inspiration for a play by lesbian feminist playwright Carolyn Gage, called "Artemisia and Hildegard."
[
122
]

The following modern musical works are directly linked to Hildegard and her music or texts:

The artwork
The Dinner Party
features a place setting for Hildegard.
[
131
]

Hildegard was the subject of season 2, episode 3 of the ZDF documentary
Die Deutschen
, titled
Hildegard von Bingen und die Macht der Frauen
("Hildegard of Bingen and the Power of Women"), it was released in 2010.
[
132
]

Hildegard was the subject of a 2012 fictionalized biographic novel
Illuminations
by
Mary Sharatt
.
[
133
]

Hildegard was the subject of an episode of the
Vision TV
Apocalypse
-themed documentary series
I Prophesy
in 2012.
[
134
]

The off-Broadway musical
In the Green
, written by
Grace McLean
, followed Hildegard's story.
[
135
]

In his book,
The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat
, neurologist
Oliver Sacks
devotes a chapter to Hildegard and concludes that in his opinion her visions were migrainous.
[
136
]

In film, Hildegard has been portrayed by
Patricia Routledge
in a BBC documentary called
Hildegard of Bingen
(1994),
[
137
]
by
Ángela Molina
in
Barbarossa
(2009)
[
138
]
and by
Barbara Sukowa
in the film
Vision
, directed by
Margarethe von Trotta
.
[
139
]

A feature documentary film,
The Unruly Mystic: Saint Hildegard
, was released by American director
Michael M. Conti
in 2014.
[
140
]

Hildegard makes an appearance in
The Baby-Sitters Club
#101: Claudia Kishi, Middle School Drop-Out
by Ann M. Martin, when Anna Stevenson dresses as Hildegard for Halloween.
[
141
]

Kristin Hayter, known professionally as
Lingua Ignota
, was inspired by Hildegard of Bingen.

In the historical novel,
A Flight of Saints
, five unruly novices escape across the Alps to join the convent of their heroine Hildegard of Bingen.
[
142
]

The plant genus
Hildegardia
is named after her because of her contributions to herbal medicine.
[
143
]

In space, the
minor planet
898 Hildegard
is named for her.
[
144
]

---

## Sources

✓ **Wikipedia**: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hildegard_of_Bingen

*Scraped on 2025-12-25 01:09 UTC*