---
composer_id: b8f37c7c-ba4e-453d-bbc1-e182242626f6
name: John Adams
normalized_name: Adams, John
birth_year: 1947
era: Contemporary
nationality: American
scraped_date: 2025-12-25
sources:
  wikipedia: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Adams_(composer)
file_version: 1
---

---

# John Adams (b. 1947)

---

**Era:** Contemporary
**Nationality:** American

---

## Biography

John Coolidge Adams
(born February 15, 1947) is an American composer and conductor. Among the most regularly performed composers of
contemporary classical music
, he is particularly noted for his
operas
, many of which center around historical events.
[
1
]
[
2
]
Apart from opera,
his oeuvre
includes orchestral,
concertante
, vocal, choral,
chamber
,
electroacoustic
, and piano music.

Born in
Worcester, Massachusetts
, Adams grew up in a musical family and was exposed to
classical music
,
jazz
,
musical theatre
, and
rock music
. He attended
Harvard University
, studying with
Leon Kirchner
,
Roger Sessions
, and
David Del Tredici
, among others. His earliest work was aligned with
modernist music
, but he began to disagree with its tenets upon reading
John Cage
's
Silence: Lectures and Writings
. Teaching at the
San Francisco Conservatory of Music
, Adams developed a minimalist aesthetic first fully realized in
Phrygian Gates
(1977) and later in the string septet
Shaker Loops
. Adams became increasingly active in
San Francisco
's contemporary music scene, and his orchestral works
Harmonium
(1980–1981) and
Harmonielehre
(1985) first gained him national attention.
[
3
]
Other popular works from this time include the
fanfare
Short Ride in a Fast Machine
(1986) and the orchestral work
El Dorado
(1991).
[
4
]

Adams's first opera was
Nixon in China
(1987), which recounts
Richard Nixon
's
1972 visit to China
and was the first of many collaborations with theatre director
Peter Sellars
. Though the work's reception was initially mixed, it has become increasingly respected since its premiere, receiving performances worldwide. Begun soon after
Nixon in China
, the opera
The Death of Klinghoffer
(1991) was based on the
Palestinian Liberation Front
's
1985 hijacking and murder
of
Leon Klinghoffer
and incited considerable controversy for its subject matter. His next notable works include a
Chamber Symphony
(1992), a
Violin Concerto
(1993), the opera-
oratorio
El Niño
(2000), the orchestral piece
My Father Knew Charles Ives
(2003), and the six-string
electric violin
concerto
The Dharma at Big Sur
(2003). Adams won a
Pulitzer Prize for Music
for
On the Transmigration of Souls
(2002), a piece for orchestra and chorus commemorating the victims of the
September 11, 2001 attacks
. Continuing with historical subjects, Adams wrote the opera
Doctor Atomic
(2005), based on
J. Robert Oppenheimer
, the
Manhattan Project
, and the building of the first
atomic bomb
. Later operas include
A Flowering Tree
(2006),
Girls of the Golden West
(2017), and
Antony and Cleopatra
(2022).

In many ways, Adams's music is developed from the minimalist tradition of
Steve Reich
and
Philip Glass
, but he tends to more readily engage in the immense orchestral textures and climaxes of late
Romanticism
in the vein of
Wagner
and
Mahler
. His style is to a considerable extent a reaction against the modernism and
serialism
of the
Second Viennese
and
Darmstadt Schools
. In addition to the Pulitzer, Adams has received the
Erasmus Prize
, a
Grawemeyer Award
, five
Grammy Awards
, the
Harvard Arts Medal
, France's
Ordre des Arts et des Lettres
, and six honorary doctorates.

John Coolidge Adams was born in
Worcester, Massachusetts
, on February 15, 1947.
[
5
]
As an adolescent, he lived in
Woodstock, Vermont
, for five years before moving to
East Concord, New Hampshire
,
[
6
]
and his family spent summers on the shores of
Lake Winnipesaukee
, where his grandfather ran a dance hall. Adams's family did not own a television, and did not have a record player until he was ten. But both his parents were musicians, his mother a singer with big bands, and his father a clarinetist.
[
7
]
He grew up with
jazz
, Americana, and
Broadway musicals
, once meeting
Duke Ellington
at his grandfather's dance hall.
[
8
]
Adams also played
baseball
as a boy.
[
9
]

In the third grade, Adams took up the clarinet, initially taking lessons from his father, Carl Adams, and later with
Boston Symphony Orchestra
bass clarinetist Felix Viscuglia. He also played in various local orchestras, concert bands, and marching bands while a student.
[
10
]
[
11
]
Adams began composing at age ten and first heard his music performed as a teenager.
[
12
]
He graduated from
Concord High School
in 1965.
[
13
]

Adams next enrolled in
Harvard University
, where he earned a bachelor of arts, magna cum laude, in 1969 and a master of arts in 1971, studying composition with
Leon Kirchner
,
Roger Sessions
,
Earl Kim
,
Harold Shapero
, and
David Del Tredici
.
[
5
]
[
3
]
As an undergraduate, he conducted Harvard's student ensemble, the
Bach Society Orchestra
, for a year and a half; his ambitious programming drew criticism in the student newspaper, where one of his concerts was called "the major disappointment of last week's musical offerings".
[
14
]
[
15
]
Adams also became engrossed by the strict
modernism
of the 20th century (such as that of
Boulez
) while at Harvard, and believed that music had to continue progressing, to the extent that he once wrote a letter to
Leonard Bernstein
criticizing the supposed stylistic reactionism of
Chichester Psalms
.
[
16
]
But by night, Adams enjoyed listening to
The Beatles
,
Jimi Hendrix
, and
Bob Dylan
,
[
8
]
[
17
]
and has said he once stood in line at eight in the morning to purchase a copy of
Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band
.
[
11
]

Adams was the first Harvard student to be allowed to write a musical composition for his senior thesis.
[
18
]
[
19
]
For his thesis, he wrote
The Electric Wake
for "electric" (i.e., amplified) soprano accompanied by an ensemble of "electric" strings, keyboards, harp, and percussion.
[
20
]
A performance could not be put together at the time, and Adams has never heard the piece performed.
[
18
]

After graduating, Adams received a copy of
John Cage
's book
Silence: Lectures and Writings
from his mother. Largely shaken of his loyalty to modernism, he was inspired to move to San Francisco,
[
16
]
where he worked at the
San Francisco Conservatory of Music
from 1972 until 1982,
[
19
]
teaching classes and directing the school's New Music Ensemble. In the early 1970s, Adams wrote several pieces of
electronic music
for a homemade
modular synthesizer
he called the "Studebaker".
[
21
]
He also wrote
American Standard
, comprising three movements, a
march
, a
hymn
, and a
jazz ballad
, which was recorded and released on
Obscure Records
in 1975.
[
22
]

In 1977, Adams wrote the half-hour-long solo piano piece
Phrygian Gates
, which he later called "my first mature composition, my official 'opus one'",
[
23
]
as well as its much shorter companion piece,
China Gates
. The next year, he finished
Shaker Loops
, a string septet based on an earlier, unsuccessful
string quartet
called
Wavemaker
.
[
24
]
In 1979, he finished his first orchestral work,
Common Tones in Simple Time
, which the San Francisco Conservatory of Music Orchestra premiered with Adams conducting.
[
25
]

In 1979, Adams became the
San Francisco Symphony
's New Music Adviser and created the symphony's "New and Unusual Music" concerts.
[
26
]
A commission from the symphony resulted in Adams's large, three-movement
choral symphony
Harmonium
(1980–81), setting texts by
John Donne
and
Emily Dickinson
. He followed this with the three-movement orchestral piece (without
strings
)
Grand Pianola Music
(1982). That summer, he wrote the score for
Matter of Heart
, a documentary about psychoanalyst
Carl Jung
, a score he later derided as "of stunning mediocrity".
[
27
]
In the winter of 1982–83, Adams worked on the electronic score for
Available Light
, a dance choreographed by
Lucinda Childs
with sets by architect
Frank Gehry
. Without dance, the electronic piece alone is called
Light Over Water
.
[
28
]

After an 18-month period of
writer's block
, Adams wrote his orchestral piece
Harmonielehre
(1984–85), which he called "a statement of belief in the power of
tonality
at a time when I was uncertain about its future".
[
29
]
Like many of Adams's pieces, it was inspired by a dream, in this case, one in which he was driving across the
San Francisco–Oakland Bay Bridge
and saw an oil tanker on the surface of the water abruptly turn upright and take off like a
Saturn V
rocket.
[
30
]
[
31
]

From 1985 to 1987, Adams composed his first
opera
,
Nixon in China
, with a
libretto
by
Alice Goodman
, based on
Richard Nixon
's 1972
visit to China
. The opera marked the first collaboration between Adams and
theatre director
Peter Sellars
, who had proposed it to Adams in 1983.
[
32
]
Adams worked with Sellars on all his operas until
Antony and Cleopatra
(2022).
[
33
]

During this time, Adams also wrote
The Chairman Dances
(1985), which he described as an "'out-take' of Act III of
Nixon in China
", to fulfill a long-delayed commission for the
Milwaukee Symphony
.
[
34
]
He also wrote the short orchestral
fanfare
Short Ride in a Fast Machine
(1986).
[
35
]

Adams wrote two orchestral pieces in 1988:
Fearful Symmetries
, a 25-minute work in the same style as
Nixon in China
, and
The Wound-Dresser
, a setting of
Walt Whitman
's 1865 poem of that title, written when Whitman was volunteering at a military hospital during the
American Civil War
.
The Wound-Dresser
is scored for baritone voice, two flutes (or two piccolos), two oboes, clarinet, bass clarinet, two bassoons, two horns, trumpet (or piccolo trumpet), timpani, synthesizer, and strings.

During this time, Adams established an international career as a conductor. From 1988 to 1990, he served as conductor and music advisor for the
Saint Paul Chamber Orchestra
.
[
3
]
He has also served as artistic director and conductor of the
Ojai
and
Cabrillo Music Festivals
in California.
[
3
]
He has conducted orchestras around the world, including the
New York Philharmonic
, the
Chicago Symphony
, the
Cleveland Orchestra
, the
Los Angeles Philharmonic
, the
London Symphony Orchestra
, and the
Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra
,
[
3
]
performing pieces by
Debussy
,
Copland
,
Stravinsky
,
Haydn
,
Reich
,
Zappa
,
Wagner
, and himself.
[
36
]

Adams completed his second opera,
The Death of Klinghoffer
, in 1991, again working with Goodman and Sellars. It is based on the
1985 hijacking of the Italian cruise ship
Achille Lauro
by Palestinian terrorists and details the murder of passenger
Leon Klinghoffer
, a retired, physically disabled Jewish American. The opera has generated controversy, including allegations that it is
antisemitic
and glorifies terrorism.
[
37
]

Adams's next piece,
Chamber Symphony
(1992), is for a 15-member
chamber orchestra
. In three movements, the work is inspired by an unlikely combination of sources:
Arnold Schoenberg
's
Chamber Symphony No. 1, Op. 9
(which Adams was studying at the time) and the "hyperactive, insistently aggressive and acrobatic" music of the cartoons his young son was watching.
[
38
]

The next year, he wrote his
Violin Concerto
for American violinist
Jorja Fleezanis
. Lasting a little more than half an hour, it is also in three movements: a "long extended rhapsody for the violin" is followed by a slow
chaconne
(titled "Body through which the dream flows", a phrase from a poem by
Robert Hass
), and then an energetic
toccare
.
[
39
]
Adams received the
Grawemeyer Award for Music Composition
for the concerto.
[
40
]

In 1995, he completed
I Was Looking at the Ceiling and Then I Saw the Sky
, a stage piece with libretto by poet
June Jordan
and staging by Sellars. Inspired by musicals, Adams called the piece a "songplay in two acts".
[
41
]
The main characters are seven young Americans from different social and ethnic backgrounds, all living in
Los Angeles
, with stories that take place around the
1994 Northridge earthquake
.

Hallelujah Junction
(1996) is a three-movement composition for two pianos that employs variations of a repeated two-note rhythm. The
intervals
between the notes remain the same for much of the piece. Adams used the same phrase for the title of his 2008 memoir.

Written to celebrate the millennium,
El Niño
(2000) is an "
oratorio
about birth in general and about the
Nativity
in specific".
[
42
]
The piece incorporates a wide range of texts, including biblical texts as well as poems by Hispanic poets like
Rosario Castellanos
,
Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz
,
Gabriela Mistral
,
Vicente Huidobro
, and
Rubén Darío
,

After the
September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks
, the
New York Philharmonic
commissioned Adams to write a memorial piece for the victims. The result,
On the Transmigration of Souls
, was premiered around the first anniversary of the attacks.
On the Transmigration of Souls
is for
orchestra
,
chorus
, and
children's choir
, accompanied by taped readings of the names of the victims mixed with the sounds of the city.
[
43
]
[
44
]
It won the 2003
Pulitzer Prize for Music
[
45
]
and the 2005
Grammy Award
for
Best Contemporary Composition
.

Commissioned by the San Francisco Symphony,
[
46
]
[
47
]
Adams's orchestral piece
My Father Knew Charles Ives
(2003) has three movements: "Concord", "The Lake", and "The Mountain". Though his father did not actually know American composer
Charles Ives
, Adams saw many similarities between the two men's lives and between their lives and his own, including their love of small-town New England life and their unfulfilled musical dreams.

Written for the
Los Angeles Philharmonic
to celebrate the opening of
Disney Hall
in 2003,
The Dharma at Big Sur
(2003) is a two-movement work for solo electric six-string violin and orchestra. Adams wrote that with
Dharma
, he "wanted to compose a piece that embodied the feeling of being on the West Coast – literally standing on a precipice overlooking the geographic shelf with the ocean extending far out to the horizon".
[
48
]
Inspired by the music of
Lou Harrison
,
[
49
]
the piece calls for some instruments (harp, piano, samplers) to use
just intonation
, a
tuning system
in which intervals sound pure, rather than
equal temperament
, the common Western tuning system in which all intervals except the octave are impure.

Adams's third opera,
Doctor Atomic
(2005), is about physicist
J. Robert Oppenheimer
, the
Manhattan Project
, and the creation and testing of the first atomic bomb. The work premiered at the San Francisco Opera in October 2005.
[
50
]
Its libretto, by Sellars, draws on original source material, including personal memoirs, recorded interviews, technical manuals of nuclear physics, declassified government documents, and the poetry of the
Bhagavad Gita
,
John Donne
,
Charles Baudelaire
, and
Muriel Rukeyser
. It takes place in June and July 1945, mainly over the last few hours before the first atomic bomb explodes at the test site in New Mexico. Characters include Oppenheimer and his wife
Kitty
,
Edward Teller
, General
Leslie Groves
, and
Robert Wilson
. Two years later, Adams extracted music from the opera to create the
Doctor Atomic Symphony
.
[
51
]

In 2018,
The Santa Fe Opera
performed
Doctor Atomic
in its summer season. The production took place in Santa Fe, 33 miles away from the
Los Alamos Laboratory
, the Manhattan Project's research and development facility. This proximity forged a deeper connection between the production and the people of Los Alamos, fostering a new relationship with the pueblo communities. According to Andrew Martinez, this association "became an opportunity to confront the histories and present-day experiences of pain and suffering that New Mexico citizens have endured since that rainy summer night in July 1945 when the first atomic bomb was detonated".
[
50
]
The production also featured a 2,400-pound silver orb hanging from the ceiling, representing the bomb. This single set piece stood on an otherwise empty stage, set against the backdrop of the
Sangre de Cristo Mountains
.
[
50
]

Adams's next opera,
A Flowering Tree
(2006), with a libretto by Adams and Sellars, is based on a folktale from the
Kannada language
of southern India translated by
A. K. Ramanujan
about a young girl who discovers she has the magic ability to transform into a flowering tree. The opera was commissioned as part of the Vienna New Crowned Hope Festival to celebrate the 250th anniversary of
Mozart
's birth, and has many parallels with Mozart's
The Magic Flute
, including its themes of "magic, transformation and the dawning of moral awareness".
[
52
]

Adams wrote three pieces for the
St. Lawrence String Quartet
: his First Quartet (2008), his concerto for
string quartet
and orchestra,
Absolute Jest
(2012), and his Second Quartet (2014). Both
Absolute Jest
and the Second Quartet are based on fragments from
Beethoven
, with
Absolute Jest
using music from his
late quartets
(specifically
Opus 131
,
Opus 135
and the
Große Fuge
) and the Second Quartet drawing from Beethoven's
Opus 110
and
111
piano sonatas
.

From 2011 to 2013, Adams wrote his two-act
Passion
oratorio,
The Gospel According to the Other Mary
, a decade after his Nativity oratorio,
El Niño
. The work focuses on the final few weeks of the life of
Jesus
from the point of view of "the other Mary",
Mary of Bethany
(sometimes misidentified as
Mary Magdalene
), her sister
Martha
, and her brother,
Lazarus
.
[
53
]
[
54
]
Sellars's libretto draws from the
Bible
and from
Rosario Castellanos
,
Rubén Darío
,
Dorothy Day
,
Louise Erdrich
,
Hildegard von Bingen
,
June Jordan
, and
Primo Levi
.

Scheherazade.2
(2014) is a four-movement "dramatic symphony"
[
55
]
for violin and orchestra. Written for violinist
Leila Josefowicz
, who frequently performed Adams's Violin Concerto and
The Dharma at Big Sur
, the work was inspired by the character
Scheherazade
(from
One Thousand and One Nights
) who, after being forced into marriage, recounts tales to her husband in order to delay her death. Adams associated modern examples of suffering and injustice toward women, with acts in
Tahrir Square
during the
Egyptian revolution of 2011
,
Kabul
, and comments from
The Rush Limbaugh Show
.
[
56
]
[
57
]
[
58
]

Adams's seventh opera,
Girls of the Golden West
(2017), with a libretto by Sellars based on historical sources, is set in mining camps during the
California Gold Rush
of the 1850s. Sellars described the opera this way: "These true stories of the Forty-Niners are overwhelming in their heroism, passion and cruelty, telling tales of racial conflicts, colorful and humorous exploits, political strife and struggles to build anew a life and to decide what it would mean to be American."
[
59
]

In 2022, Adams completed his eighth opera,
Antony and Cleopatra
, based on
Shakespeare
's
play of the same name
.

On June 14, 2023, the Library of Congress announced that it was acquiring Adams's manuscripts and papers for its Music Division, which also includes the papers of Bernstein, Copland,
George
and
Ira Gershwin
,
Martha Graham
,
Charles Mingus
, and
Neil Simon
, among others.
[
60
]

Adams was married to Hawley Currens, a music teacher, from 1970 to 1974.
[
61
]
He is married to photographer Deborah O'Grady, with whom he has a daughter, Emily, and a son, the composer
Samuel Carl Adams
.
[
9
]
[
62
]

Adams's music is usually categorized as
minimalist
or
post-minimalist
, although in an interview he said that his music is part of the "post-style" era at the end of the 20th century.
[
63
]
He employs minimalist techniques, such as repeating patterns, but is not a strict follower of the movement. Adams adopted much of the minimalist technique of
Steve Reich
and
Philip Glass
, but his work synthesizes this with the orchestral textures of
Wagner
,
Mahler
, and
Sibelius
.
[
64
]
Comparing
Shaker Loops
to the minimalist composer
Terry Riley
's piece
In C
, Adams remarked:

Many of Adams's ideas are a reaction to the philosophy of
serialism
and its depictions of "the composer as scientist".
[
66
]
The
Darmstadt School
of
twelve-tone
composition was dominant while Adams was in college, and he compared class to a "mausoleum where we would sit and count tone-rows in
Webern
".
[
67
]

Adams experienced a musical epiphany after reading
John Cage
's 1961 book
Silence
, which he said "dropped into my psyche like a time bomb",
[
68
]
causing him to drop out of academia, "pack his belongings into a VW Bug, and drive to California".
[
69
]
Cage posed fundamental questions about what music was, and regarded all types of sounds as viable sources of music. This perspective offered Adams a liberating alternative to serialism's rule-based techniques. But Adams found Cage's music equally restricting.
[
16
]
He began to experiment with electronic music, and his experiences are reflected in the writing of
Phrygian Gates
(1977–78), in which the constant shifting between modules in
Lydian mode
and
Phrygian mode
refers to activating
electronic gates
rather than architectural ones. Adams explained that working with synthesizers caused a "diatonic conversion", a reversion to the belief that tonality was a force of nature.
[
70
]

Some of Adams's compositions amalgamate different styles.
Grand Pianola Music
(1981–82) is a humorous piece that purposely draws its content from musical cliches. In
The Dharma at Big Sur,
Adams draws from literary texts such as
Jack Kerouac
,
Gary Snyder
, and
Henry Miller
to illustrate the California landscape. He has professed his love of genres other than classical music; his parents were jazz musicians, and he has also listened to rock music, albeit only passively. Adams once claimed that originality was not an urgent concern for him the way it was for minimalists, and compared his position to that of
Gustav Mahler
,
J. S. Bach
, and
Johannes Brahms
, who "were standing at the end of an era and were embracing all of the evolutions that occurred over the previous thirty to fifty years".
[
71
]

Like other minimalists of his time, Adams used a steady pulse to define and control his music. The pulse was best known from
Terry Riley
's early composition
In C
, and more and more composers used it as a common practice. Jonathan Bernard highlighted this adoption by comparing
Phrygian Gates
, from 1977, and
Fearful Symmetries
, from 1988.
[
72
]

In the late 1980s and early 1990s, Adams started to add a new character to his music, which he called "the Trickster". The Trickster allowed Adams to use the repetitive style and rhythmic drive of minimalism while simultaneously poking fun at it.
[
73
]
When Adams commented on his own characterization of particular minimalist music, he said that he went joyriding on "those Great Prairies of non-event".
[
74
]

Adams won the Pulitzer Prize for Music in 2003 for
On the Transmigration of Souls
.
[
45
]
Response to his output as a whole has been more divided, and Adams's works have been called both brilliant and boring in reviews that stretch across both ends of the rating spectrum.
Shaker Loops
has been called "hauntingly ethereal", while 1999's
Naïve and Sentimental Music
has been called "an exploration of a marvelously extended spinning melody".
[
75
]
The New York Times
called 1996's
Hallelujah Junction
"a two-piano work played with appealingly sharp edges", and 2001's
American Berserk
"a short, volatile solo piano work".
[
76
]

The most critically divisive pieces in Adams's collection are his historical operas. At first release,
Nixon in China
received mostly negative press. In
The New York Times
,
Donal Henahan
called the
Houston Grand Opera
world premiere of the work "worth a few giggles but hardly a strong candidate for the standard repertory" and "visually striking but coy and insubstantial".
[
77
]
In the
St. Louis Post-Dispatch
, James Wierzbicki called Adams's score the weak point in an otherwise well-staged performance, describing it as "inappropriately placid", "cliché-ridden in the abstract" and trafficking "heavily in Adams's worn-out Minimalist clichés".
[
78
]
But with time, the opera has come to be revered. In
Music and Vision
,
Robert Hugill
called a production "astonishing ... nearly twenty years after its premier",
[
79
]
while
The Guardian'
s
Fiona Maddocks
praised the score's "diverse and subtle palette" and Adams's "rhythmic ingenuity".
[
80
]

More recently,
New York Times
critic
Anthony Tommasini
commended a 2007
American Composers Orchestra
concert celebrating Adams's 60th birthday, calling Adams a "skilled and dynamic conductor" and the music "gravely beautiful yet restless".
[
81
]

The opera
The Death of Klinghoffer
has been criticized as
antisemitic
by some, including the Klinghoffer family.
Leon Klinghoffer
's daughters, Lisa and Ilsa, after attending the opera, released a statement saying: "We are outraged at the exploitation of our parents and the coldblooded murder of our father as the centerpiece of a production that appears to us to be anti-Semitic."
[
82
]
In response to these accusations of antisemitism, composer and
Oberlin College
professor
Conrad Cummings
wrote a letter to the editor defending
Klinghoffer
as "the closest analogue to the experience of Bach's audience attending his most demanding works", and noted that, as a person of Jewish descent, he "found nothing anti-Semitic about the work".
[
83
]

After the September 11 attacks in 2001, performances by the Boston Symphony Orchestra of excerpts from
Klinghoffer
were canceled. BSO managing director Mark Volpe said of the decision: "We originally programmed the choruses from John Adams'
The Death of Klinghoffer
because we believe in it as a work of art, and we still hold that conviction. ... [
Tanglewood Festival Chorus
members] explained that it was a purely human reason, and that it wasn't in the least bit a criticism of the work."
[
84
]
Adams and
Klinghoffer
librettist Alice Goodman criticized the decision,
[
85
]
and Adams rejected a request to substitute a performance of
Harmonium
, saying: "The reason that I asked them not to do
Harmonium
was that I felt that
Klinghoffer
is a serious and humane work, and it's also a work about which many people have made prejudicial judgments without even hearing it. I felt that if I said, 'OK,
Klinghoffer
is too hot to handle, do
Harmonium
, that in a sense I would be agreeing with the judgment about
Klinghoffer
.
'
"
[
86
]
In response to an article by the
San Francisco Chronicle
'
s
David Wiegand
[
87
]
denouncing the BSO decision, musicologist and critic
Richard Taruskin
accused the work of catering to "anti-American, anti-Semitic and anti-bourgeois" prejudices.
[
88
]

A 2014 revival by the
Metropolitan Opera
reignited debate. Former New York City mayor
Rudy Giuliani
, who marched in protest against the production, wrote: "This work is both a distortion of history and helped, in some ways, to foster a three decade long feckless policy of creating a moral equivalency between the
Palestinian Authority
, a corrupt terrorist organization, and the state of Israel, a democracy ruled by law."
[
89
]
Mayor
Bill de Blasio
criticized Giuliani's participation in the protests, and
Oskar Eustis
, the artistic director of
The Public Theater
, said: "It is not only permissible for the Met to do this piece – it's required for the Met to do the piece. It is a powerful and important opera."
[
90
]
A week after watching a Met performance of the opera, Supreme Court Justice
Ruth Bader Ginsburg
said "there was nothing antisemitic about the opera" and characterized the portrayal of the Klinghoffers as "very strong, very brave" and the terrorists as "bullies and irrational".
[
91
]

---

## Sources

✓ **Wikipedia**: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Adams_(composer)

*Scraped on 2025-12-25 01:09 UTC*